.. _translation:

===========
Translation
===========

Ren'Py contains a comprehensive framework for the translation of
visual novels. There are four main types of things that can be
translated:

Dialogue
    The main dialogue of the script can be translated, including a
    provision for splitting, combining, omitting, and reordering
    lines.
Menus and other Strings
    All interface text can be translated.
Images and Files
    It's possible to include variant images and other files that are
    used when a language is selected.
Styles
    It's possible to customize styles based on the language, so that
    the game can automatically switch to a font appropriate for the
    language that was chosen.

Ren'Py's translation support is currently focused on sanctioned
translations, where the game's creators either release the game
scripts to the translator or create translation templates
themselves. Support for unsanctioned translations is more limited.

Primary and Alternate Languages
===============================

Ren'Py expects each game to be written in a single primary
language. This is called the ``None`` language, regardless of what
language it actually is. (For example, if the game was written in
English, English will be the ``None`` language.)

When the None language is selected, most of Ren'Py's translation
functionality is disabled.

Alternate languages are referred to by names which can double as
python identifiers. (Starts with a letter or underscore, followed by
letters, numbers, and underscores.)

Generating Translation Files
============================

When the project scripts are available, translation files can be
generated by opening the project in the Ren'Py Launcher, and choosing
"Generate Translations". The launcher will prompt you for the name of
the language to generate, and will then proceed to create or update
the translation files.

The translation files live in directories underneath the "tl"
subdirectory of the game directory. For example, if you create a
piglatin translation of the tutorial project, translation files will
be placed under ``tutorial/game/tl/piglatin``.

There will be one translation file created per game script file. The
common.rpy file will also be created to contain translations of
strings found in the common code.

Translating Dialogue
====================

As Ren'Py is a visual novel engine, we expect most translation to
involve dialogue. Ren'Py includes a flexible framework that allows
dialogue to be split, combined, reordered, and omitted entirely.

Translation Blocks
------------------

The fundamental unit of translation is a block of consecutive dialogue
statements. Dialogue statements include the say statement, voice
statement, and nvl clear statement. As an example, take the following
code::

    scene bg washington
    show eileen vhappy
    with dissolve

    e "Thank you for taking a look at the Ren'Py translation framework."
    
    show eileen happy
    
    e "We aim to provide a comprehensive framework for translating dialogue, strings, images, and styles."
    
    e "Pretty much everything your game needs!"

This is broken up into multiple translation blocks, each with it's own
identifier, based on the text in the block. The first block is
automatically assigned the identifier
ceac1acbc54d30814453d92842c5a215m, and contains the statement::

    e "Thank you for taking a look at the Ren'Py translation framework."

The second block has the identifier 4b85f371ca99b65c0f21da1bddfd4941,
and contains::

    e "We aim to provide a comprehensive framework for translating dialogue, strings, images, and styles."
    
    e "Pretty much everything your game needs!"

These blocks are created automatically by Ren'Py when the game script
is loaded.

Translate Statement
-------------------
  
When you generate translations for a language, Ren'Py will generate a
translate statement corresponding to each translation block. When
translating the code above, Ren'Py will generate::

    # game/script.rpy:85 start
    translate piglatin ceac1acbc54d30814453d92842c5a215:

        e "Thank you for taking a look at the Ren'Py translation framework."

    # game/script.rpy:89 start
    translate piglatin 4b85f371ca99b65c0f21da1bddfd4941:

        e "We aim to provide a comprehensive framework for translating dialogue, strings, images, and styles."

        e "Pretty much everything your game needs!"

This can be translated by editing the generated code. A finished
translation might look like::

    # game/script.rpy:85 start
    translate piglatin ceac1acbc54d30814453d92842c5a215:

        # e "Thank you for taking a look at the Ren'Py translation framework."
        e "Ankthay ouyay orfay akingtay away ooklay atway ethay En'Pyray anslationtray ameworkfray."

    # game/script.rpy:89 start
    translate piglatin 4b85f371ca99b65c0f21da1bddfd4941:

        # e "We aim to provide a comprehensive framework for translating dialogue, strings, images, and styles."
        e "Eway aimway otay ovidepray away omprehensivecay ameworkfray orfay anslatingtray ialogueday, ingsstray, imagesway, andway ylesstay."

        # e "Pretty much everything your game needs!"
        e "Ettypray uchmay everythingway ouryay amegay eedsnay!"


When a block in the main script is encountered, Ren'Py checks to see
if a translate statement corresponding to that block exists. If so, it
executes the translate statement instead of the translated block,
showing the user the translation.

More Complex Translations
-------------------------

Translate statements do not need to contain 1-to-1 translations of the
original language. For example, a long line could be split::

    # game/script.rpy:89 start
    translate piglatin 4b85f371ca99b65c0f21da1bddfd4941:

        # e "We aim to provide a comprehensive framework for translating dialogue, strings, images, and styles."
        e "Eway aimway otay ovidepray away omprehensivecay ameworkfray..."
        e "...orfay anslatingtray ialogueday, ingsstray, imagesway, andway ylesstay."

        # e "Pretty much everything your game needs!"
        e "Ettypray uchmay everythingway ouryay amegay eedsnay!"

Similarly, statements can be removed or reordered.
        
It's also possible to run non-dialogue statements, such as
conditionals or python code. For example, we can translate::

  e "You scored [points] points!"

into::

    translate piglatin f534048c0f62aaf9b78fef569f9a4fea:

        e $ latin_points = to_roman_numerals(points)
        e "Ouyay oredscay [latin_points] ointspay!"


Tips
----

When a group of dialogue statements changes, the entire group needs to
be re-translated. When writing a game, it might make sense to insert
pass statements to break long stretches of dialogue into multiple
parts. 

While translation blocks may include python code, this code should not
have side effects visible outside of the block. That's because
changing languages will restart the translation block, causing the
side effects to occur multiple times.

Menu and String Translations
============================

In addition to dialogue, Ren'Py is able to translate text found in
menus and other strings. Interface translations are a 1-to-1
substitution. Wherever a string is found, it will be replaced by a
single replacement.

When generating translations, Ren'Py will scan the script files for
menus, and for strings enclosed inside the _() function. It will then
place the strings inside a translate strings block. For example, if we
have the following script::

  define e = Character(_("Eileen"))

  # ...
  
  menu:

       "Go West":
          # ...

       "Head East":
          # ...

Ren'Py will generate the following code::

  translate piglatin strings:

      old "Eileen"
      new "Eileen"

      old "Go West"
      new "Go West"

      old "Head East"
      new "Head East"

Which can then be translated::
  
  translate piglatin strings:

      old "Eileen"
      new "Eileenway"

      old "Go West"
      new "Ogay Estway"

      old "Head East"
      new "Eadhay Eastway"

Translating substitutions
-------------------------

String substitutions can be translate by using the !t conversion
flag. So the following code will be translatable using the dialogue
and code translation systems::

  if mood_points > 5:
      $ mood = _("great")
  else:
      $ mood = _("awful")

  "I'm feeling [mood!t]."
  
